Initiate documentation on the kernel contents (#1293)
jupyterlite/jupyterlite: docs/reference/contents.md

# Contents

> This section describes how is the contents integrated in the website and how it is used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section describes how contents is integrated on a JupyterLite site and how it is used.
```

## Access within the kernel

> By default the contents through the filebrowser is independent of the contents
> accessible within an execution kernel. Sharing the contents with the kernel is dependent
> of that kernels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, contents accessible via the default filebrowser is independent of the contents
accessible within an execution kernel. Making the files available to the kernel may depend on how kernels are implemented.
```

### Emscripten kernel

Kernels using Emscripten (like [pyodide](https://github.com/jupyterlite/pyodide-kernel/)
or [xeus kernels](https://github.com/jupyterlite/xeus/)) relies on the
[Emscripten filesystem](https://emscripten.org/docs/api_reference/Filesystem-API.html)

> to access their contents. For such case, `@jupyterlite/contents` provides a helper class
> [`DriveFS`](https://jupyterlite.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference/api/ts/classes/jupyterlite_contents.DriveFS-1.html)
> to be mounted within Emscripten filesystem with a snippet like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to access their contents. For such case, `@jupyterlite/contents` provides a [`DriveFS`](https://jupyterlite.readthedocs.io/en/stable/reference/api/ts/classes/jupyterlite_contents.DriveFS-1.html) helper class which can be used to mount files in the Emscripten filesystem:
```

```ts
  const mountpoint = '/drive';

>   const { FS, PATH, ERRNO_CODES } = /* provided by the empscripten module */;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  const { FS, PATH, ERRNO_CODES } = /* provided by the emscripten module */;
```

    baseUrl, // Website base URL
    driveName: 'my-drive', // Any name of your choosing
    mountpoint,
  });
  FS.mkdir(mountpoint);
  FS.mount(driveFS, {}, mountpoint);
  FS.chdir(mountpoint);
```

After mounting the drive, the Jupyter Server contents (the one displayed in the
filebrowser) will be available within the kernel under the folder `/drive`.

The website base URL is required for the `DriveFS` to request its content from the main
application. Diving into the drive architecture will clarify that.

```{mermaid}
flowchart LR
    subgraph main thread
        direction TB
        M[Main thread]
        M --- C[Contents]
    end
    subgraph webworker
        direction TB
        M -.- K[Kernel]
        K --- FS[Emscripten FS]
        FS --- D[DriveFS]
    end
    S[Service worker] -.-|BroadcastChannel| M
    D -.-|REST API| S
```

Three threads are at play when running a kernel inside JupyterLite:

- The main thread: it executes the main user interface and knows about the filebrowser
  contents.
- The kernel web worker: it executes the kernel (e.g. evaluate the code snippet from a
  notebook sent by the main thread). It mounts a `DriveFS` into the Emscripten
  filesystem.

> - The service worker: it serves website assets from cache (to work offline). And it also
>   can capture any other network requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The service worker: it serves website assets from cache (to work offline). And it can also
  capture any other network requests.
```

Assuming the kernel executes the following python snippet code writing into a text file:

```py
Path("dummy.txt").write_text("Writing on Emscripten filesystem")
```

Here is a simplification sequence of interaction happening to perform the filesystem
operation:

```{mermaid}
sequenceDiagram
  participant P as Python interpreter
  participant F as Emscripten FS
  participant D as DriveFS
  participant S as Service Worker
  participant M as Main thread
  participant C as Contents manager

  P->>+F: Write text into file
  F->>+D: Call put
  D->>+S: Send HTTP POST /api/drive
  S->>+M: Broadcast message via channel
  M->>+C: Call `save`
  C-->>-M: None
  M-->>-S: Response
  S-->>-D: Response
  D-->>-F: Return
  F-->>-P: Done
```

> When the code interact with the filesystem, the emscripten filesystem API is triggered.

Reviewer: Maybe this can be rephrased to say Emscripten provides a virtual filesystem that simulates a local file system?

And / or link to https://emscripten.org/docs/porting/files/file_systems_overview.html ?

> When the code interact with the filesystem, the emscripten filesystem API is triggered.

Author: ```suggestion
When the code interact with the filesystem, it interacts with the [Emscripten virtual filesystem](https://emscripten.org/docs/porting/files/file_systems_overview.html).  That virtual filesystem
allows classical code (like the Python snippet in this example) to be run with little or no change.
Moreover the virtual filesystem allows developer to provide their own mechanism for dealing
with filesystem io through a [filesystem API](https://emscripten.org/docs/api_reference/Filesystem-API.html#filesystem-api).
```

In the sequence, we simplify the API triggered to a single `put` (in truth multiple
calls will happen when writing a file). As we plugged a custom drive implementation
`DriveFS`, the put resolution will therefore be the responsibility of that code. The
logic in place is to start a POST HTTP request on the `/api/drive` endpoint with a body

> describing the filesystem operation to be perform. In this case, it looks like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
describing the filesystem operation to be performed. In this case, it looks like:
```

```json
{
  "method": "put",
  "path": "/dummy.txt",
  "data": { "format": "text", "data": "Writing on Emscripten filesystem" }
}
```

> That request is meant to be captured by the service worker (defined in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That request is meant to be captured by the service worker (defined in the
```

`@jupyterlite/server` package). The service worker will forward the HTTP request to the
main thread via a message in a `BroadcastChannel` named `/api/drive.v1`.  
That message will be captured by the `BroadcastChannelWrapper` that is instantiated in
the plugin `@jupyterlite/server-extension:emscripten-filesystem`. That wrapper is aware
of the Jupyter contents manager to answer the request. For example, in the case of a
`put` operation, the `save` method of contents manager will be called.  
Then the reply is propagated back (through the broadcast channel, then the network
request,...) to the Emscripten filesystem.

> The need to use a HTTP request raises to the constrain of answering a synchronous API

Reviewer: Maybe we can also add a note that this machinery makes it possible for a lite kernel to access contents from a custom JupyterLab drive?

(aka the Emscripten filesystem) with an asynchronous API (aka the Jupyter contents

> manager).

Author: ```suggestion
manager).

That architecture makes it possible for lite kernel to access contents from a custom [JupyterLab drive](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/interfaces/services.Contents.IDrive.html) to have multiple source of contents.
```

{
  "method": "put",
  "path": "/dummy.txt",
  "data": { "format": "text", "data": "Writing on Emscripten filesystem" }
}
```

That request is meant to be captured by the service worker (defined in the
`@jupyterlite/server` package). The service worker will forward the HTTP request to the
main thread via a message in a `BroadcastChannel` named `/api/drive.v1`.  
That message will be captured by the `BroadcastChannelWrapper` that is instantiated in
the plugin `@jupyterlite/server-extension:emscripten-filesystem`. That wrapper is aware
of the Jupyter contents manager to answer the request. For example, in the case of a
`put` operation, the `save` method of contents manager will be called.  
Then the reply is propagated back (through the broadcast channel, then the network
request,...) to the Emscripten filesystem.

The need to use a HTTP request raises to the constrain of answering a synchronous API
(aka the Emscripten filesystem) with an asynchronous API (aka the Jupyter contents
manager).

That architecture makes it possible for lite kernel to access contents from a custom
[JupyterLab drive](https://jupyterlab.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api/interfaces/services.Contents.IDrive.html)

> to have multiple source of contents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to have multiple sources of contents.
```
